It's a funny thing about mothers and fathers. Even when their
own child is the most disgusting little blister you could ever
imagine, they still think that he or she is wonderful.
Some parents go further. They become so blinded by
adoration they manage to convince themselves their child has
qualities of genius.
Well, there is nothing very wrong with all this. It's the way
of the world. It is only when the parents begin telling us about
the brilliance of their own revolting offspring, that we start
shouting, "Bring us a basin! We're going to be sick!"

School teachers suffer a good deal from having to listen to
this sort of twaddle from proud parents, but they usually get
their own back when the time comes to write the end-of-term
reports. If I were a teacher I would cook up some real
scorchers for the children of doting parents. "Your son
Maximilian", I would write, "is a total wash-out. I hope you
have a family business you can push him into when he leaves
school because he sure as heck won't get a job anywhere else."
Or if I were feeling lyrical that day, I might write, "It is a
curious truth that grasshoppers have their hearing-organs in 
the sides of the abdomen. Your daughter Vanessa, judging by
what she's learnt this term, has no hearing-organs at all."

I might even delve deeper into natural history and say,
"The periodical cicada spends six years as a grub
underground, and no more than six days as a free creature of
sunlight and air. Your son Wilfred has spent six years as a
grub in this school and we are still waiting for him to emerge
from the chrysalis." A particularly poisonous little girl might
sting me into saying, "Fiona has the same glacial beauty as an
iceberg, but unlike the iceberg she has absolutely nothing
below the surface." I
think I might enjoy writing end-of-term reports for the
stinkers in my class. But enough of that. We have to get on.
Occasionally one comes across parents who take the
opposite line, who show no interest at all in their children,
and these of course are far worse than the doting ones. Mr
and Mrs Wormwood were two such parents. They had a son
called Michael and a daughter called Matilda, and the parents
looked upon Matilda in particular as nothing more than a scab. A scab is something
you have to put up with until the time c
when you can pick it off and flick it away.
omes 
Mr and Mrs Wormwood looked forward enormously to the
time when they could pick their little daughter off and flick
her away, preferably into the next county or even further than
that.
It is bad enough when parents treat ordinary children as
though they were scabs and bunions, but it becomes
somehow a lot worse when the child in
question is extraordinary, and by that I
mean sensitive and brilliant. Matilda was
both of these things, but above all she was
brilliant. Her mind was so nimble and she
was so quick to learn that her ability should
have been obvious even to the most half-witted of parents.
But Mr and Mrs Wormwood were both so gormless and so
wrapped up in their own silly little lives that they failed to
notice anything unusual about their daughter. To tell the
truth, I doubt they would have noticed had she crawled into
the house with a broken leg.
Matilda's brother Michael was a perfectly normal boy, but
the sister, as I said, was something to make your eyes pop. By
the age of one and a half her speech was perfect and she
knew as many words as most grown-ups. The parents, instead 
of applauding her, called her a noisy chatterbox and told her
sharply that small girls should be seen and not heard.
By the time she was three, Matilda had taught herself to
read by studying newspapers and magazines that lay around
the house. At the age of four, she could read fast and well and
she naturally began hankering after books. The only book in
the whole of this enlightened household was something called
Easy Cooking belonging to her mother, and when she had
read this from cover to cover and had learnt all the recipes by
heart, she decided she wanted something more interesting.

"Daddy," she said, "do you think you could buy me a
book?"
"A book?" he said. "What d'you want a flaming book for?"
"To read, Daddy."
"What's wrong with the telly, for heaven's sake? We've got a
lovely telly with a twelve-inch screen and now you come
asking for a book! You're getting spoiled, my girl!"
Nearly every weekday afternoon Matilda was left alone in
the house. Her brother (five years older than her) went to
school. Her father went to work and her mother went out
playing bingo in a town eight miles away. Mrs Wormwood
was hooked on bingo and played it five afternoons a week. On 
the afternoon of the day when her father had refused to buy
her a book, Matilda set out all by herself to walk to the public
library in the village. When she arrived, she introduced
herself to the librarian, Mrs Phelps. She asked if she might sit
awhile and read a book. Mrs Phelps, slightly taken aback at
the arrival of such a tiny girl unacccompanied by a parent,
nevertheless told her she was very welcome.
"Where are the children's books please?" Matilda asked.
"They're over there on those lower shelves," Mrs Phelps
told her. "Would you like me to help you find a nice one with
lots of pictures in it?"
"No, thank you," Matilda said. "I'm sure I can manage."
From then on, every afternoon, as soon as her mother had
left for bingo, Matilda would toddle down to the library. The
walk took only ten minutes and this allowed her two glorious
hours sitting quietly by herself in a cosy corner devouring one
book after another. When she had read every single children's
book in the place, she started wandering round in search of
something else.
Mrs Phelps, who had been watching her with fascination
for the past few weeks, now got up from her desk and went
over to her. "Can I help you, Matilda?" she asked. 
"I'm wondering what to read next," Matilda said. "I've
finished all the children's books."
"You mean you've looked at the pictures?"
"Yes, but I've read the books as well."
Mrs Phelps looked down at Matilda from her great height
and Matilda looked right back up at her.
"I thought some were very poor," Matilda said, "but others
were lovely. I liked The Secret Garden best of all. It was full of
mystery. The mystery of the room behind the closed door and
the mystery of the garden behind the big wall."
Mrs Phelps was stunned. ''Exactly how old are you,
Matilda?" she asked.
"Four years and three months," Matilda said.
Mrs Phelps was more stunned than ever, but she had the
sense not to show it. "What sort of a book would you like to
read next?" she asked.
Matilda said, "I would like a really good one that grownups read. A famous one. I don't know any names."
Mrs Phelps looked along the shelves, taking her time. She
didn't quite know what to bring out. How, she asked herself,
does one choose a famous grown-up book for a four-year-old
girl? Her first thought was to pick a young teenager's
romance of the kind that is written for fifteen-year-old 
schoolgirls, but for some reason she found herself instinctively walking past that particular shelf.
"Try this," she said at last. "It's very famous and very good.
If it's too long for you, just let me know and I'll find
something shorter and a bit easier."
"Great Expectations," Matilda read, "by Charles Dickens.
I'd love to try it."
I must be mad, Mrs Phelps told herself, but to Matilda she
said, "Of course you may try it."
Over the next few afternoons Mrs Phelps could hardly take
her eyes from the small girl sitting for hour after hour in the
big armchair at the far end of the room with the book on her
lap. It was necessary to rest it on the lap because it was too
heavy for her to hold up, which meant she had to sit leaning
forward in order to read. And a strange sight it was, this tiny
dark-haired person sitting there with her feet nowhere near
touching the floor, totally absorbed in the wonderful
adventures of Pip and old Miss Havisham and her cobwebbed
house and by the spell of magic that Dickens the great storyteller had woven with his words. The only movement from
the reader was the lifting of the hand every now and then to
turn over a page, and Mrs Phelps always felt sad when the 
time came for her to cross the floor and say; "It's ten to five,
Matilda."
During the first week of Matilda's visits Mrs Phelps had
said to her, "Does your mother walk you down here every day
and then take you home?"
"My mother goes to Aylesbury every afternoon to play
bingo," Matilda had said. "She doesn't know I come here."
"But that's surely not right," Mrs Phelps said. "I think you'd
better ask her."
"I'd rather not," Matilda said. "She doesn't encourage
reading books. Nor does my father."
"But what do they expect you to do every afternoon in an
empty house?"
"Just mooch around and watch the telly."
"I see."
"She doesn't really care what I do," Matilda said a little
sadly.
Mrs Phelps was concerned about the child's safety on the
walk through the fairly busy village High Street and the
crossing of the road, but she decided not to interfere.
Within a week, Matilda had finished Great Expectations
which in that edition contained four hundred and eleven 
pages. "I loved it," she said to Mrs Phelps. "Has Mr Dickens
written any others?"
"A great number," said the astounded Mrs Phelps. "Shall I
choose you another?"
Over the next six months, under Mrs Phelps's
watchful and compassionate eye, Matilda read the following
books:

Nicholas Nickleby by Charles Dickens
Oliver Twist by Charles Dickens
Jane Eyre by Charlotte Bronte
Pride and Prejudice by Jane Austen
Tess of the D'Urbervilles by Thomas Hardy
Gone to Earth by Mary Webb
Kim by Rudyard Kipling
The Invisible Man by H. G. Wells
The Old Man and the Sea by Ernest Hemingway
The Sound and the Fury by William Faulkner
The Grapes of Wrath by John Steinbeck
The Good Companions by J. B. Priestley
Brighton Rock by Graham Greene
Animal Farm by George Orwell
 
It was a formidable list and by now Mrs Phelps was filled
with wonder and excitement, but it was probably a good thing
that she did not allow herself to be completely carried away
by it all. Almost anyone else witnessing the achievements of
this small child would have been tempted to make a great fuss
and shout the news all over the village and beyond, but not so
Mrs Phelps. She was someone who minded her own business
and had long since discovered it was seldom worth while to
interfere with other people's children.
"Mr Hemingway says a lot of things I don't understand,"
Matilda said to her. "Especially about men and women. But I
loved it all the same. The way he tells it I feel I am right there
on the spot watching it all happen."
''A fine writer will always make you feel that," Mrs Phelps
said. "And don't worry about the bits you can't understand.
Sit back and allow the words to wash around you, like music."
"I will, I will."
"Did you know", Mrs Phelps said, "that public libraries like
this allow you to borrow books and take them home?"
"I didn't know that," Matilda said. "Could I do it?"
"Of course," Mrs Phelps said. "When you have chosen the
book you want, bring it to me so I can make a note of it and 
it's yours for two weeks. You can take more than one if you
wish."

From then on, Matilda would visit the library only once a
week in order to take out new books and return the old ones.
Her own small bedroom now became her reading-room and
there she would sit and read most afternoons, often with a
mug of hot chocolate beside her. She was not quite tall
enough to reach things around the kitchen, but she kept a
small box in the outhouse which she brought in and stood on
in order to get whatever she wanted. Mostly it was hot
chocolate she made, warming the milk in a saucepan on the
stove before mixing it. Occasionally she made Bovril or
Ovaltine. It was pleasant to take a hot drink up to her room
and have it beside her as she sat in her silent room reading in
the empty house in the afternoons. The books transported her
into new worlds and introduced her to amazing people who
lived exciting lives. She went on olden-day sailing ships with
Joseph Conrad. She went to Africa with Ernest Hemingway
and to India with Rudyard Kipling. She travelled all over the
world while sitting in her little room in an English village.